Welcome to JW Broadcasting. This month we focus on how we can refine ourselves as
Christians by imitating Jehovah's Holiness. Do you sometimes say things you later
regret? Something unkind perhaps critical of others? We'll learn from this
dramatization how to adjust not only what we say but also how we think. If you're a
young person, do you ever feel you're in a fight? A fight to please Jehovah? A fight
to be joyful despite opposition? You'll enjoy our new music video. Some of Jehovah's
people have suffered disappointing spiritual setbacks. Jehovah lovingly wants
people to return to him. We'll see how he helped this man turn his life around.
All of this and more on JW Broadcasting for October 2019. When I say the words
holy and holiness, what comes to your mind? Many think of words like clean and
pure. But let's change the question a little. Who comes to your mind? Likely you
think of Jehovah. You might also picture Jesus Christ and the Holy Angels. But do
you think of imperfect humans? Can humans be described as holy? Yes. We know
this because humans were created in God's image. Just as we can reflect godly
qualities such as love, kindness and self-control, we can reflect holiness. How
seriously should we take holiness? It's no small matter. Today the world around us
is increasing in badness. 2 Timothy chapter 3 verse 13 warns that wicked men would advance
from bad to worse. Undoubtedly, before the end, Satan's efforts to promote wickedness
will intensify. So we must intensify our efforts to be holy and reject all badness.
Who do you think are Satan's primary targets? We are. He and the demons are like a
pack of hungry lions looking to devour us. Being a publisher of the good news is
a privilege that Satan seeks to attack. Are you a parent with children? Do you think
Satan wants you to become unclean? Yes. He knows that devouring a family head could
weaken an entire family. In the congregation, Satan would love to devour you dear pioneers,
ministerial servants and elders. Are you in the circuit work? A missionary? A
Bethelite? What a sacred privilege. But remember, it also means that we have a big target
on our back. Satan and the demons would love to penetrate our clean and holy position.
Doing so could impact the kingdom work or stumble others. So we can't be complacent.
We must intensify our efforts to reject all badness. Thus holiness is a vital topic.
To that end, the theme for this month's program is perfecting holiness in God's fear.
It's based on 2 Corinthians, chapter 7 and verse 1.
To begin, we need to better understand the source of holiness, Jehovah God. As we read
the Bible, we see that holiness is an important quality that Jehovah wants us to know about
Him. The Bible contains many verses that associate God's name with the words holy and
holiness. Please open your copy of the Bible to one example at Isaiah chapter 6. We'll
start at Isaiah chapter 6 and verse 1. Now imagine that you are the prophet Isaiah who received
a divine vision. What would you have seen and heard? Let's read verses 1 to 3.
In the year that King Isaiah died, I saw Jehovah sitting on a lofty and elevated throne,
and the skirts of his robe filled the temple. Seraphs were standing above him. Each had six wings.
Each covered his face with two and covered his feet with two, and each of them would fly about
with two. And one called to the other, holy, holy, holy is Jehovah of armies. The whole earth
is filled with his glory. Isaiah was likely filled with awe. Verse 2 indicates that he saw
seraphs, spirit creatures, evidently a very high rank. What do we learn from their song?
They're repeating the word holy three times, teaches us that Jehovah is holy to the superlative
degree. No one else is as holy as he is. But what exactly is holiness? What does it mean to be
holy? Let's dig deeper. We can do so with a helpful tool found in the revised New World
translation. If you don't have the revised edition in your language, we'll share the key point
in just a moment. In the revised printed edition, the glossary is located several pages after
revelation, and immediately after the Bible words index. The topics are arranged alphabetically.
So please find the entry for holy holiness. If you're using JW Library,
here are two ways to get to the glossary. In the app, go to the Bible, then at the top of the
screen tap on the magnifying glass to start a search, then type in the word holy. Soon you'll see
an entry from the glossary. Tap on that. Another way is to go to publications and then books.
From there you can open the glossary and find the entry for holy. Ready? Let's read it.
A quality possessed inherently by Jehovah, a state of absolute moral purity and sacredness.
When referring to humans, animals, things, places, time periods, and activities,
the original Hebrew word conveys the thought of separateness,
exclusiveness, or sanctification to the holy God. A state of being set aside for Jehovah's service.
In the Christian Greek scriptures, the words rendered holy and holiness,
likewise denote separation to God. The words are also used to refer to purity in one's personal
conduct. What did we learn? First, we're reminded that Jehovah is pure in the absolute sense.
But what does it mean that holiness is a quality that he possesses inherently?
Let's illustrate. Consider the words human and imperfect. Today those two words naturally go
together. Imperfection is within all of us and affects everything we do. Now consider another set
of words that consistently go together. Jehovah and Holy. Holiness permeates Jehovah. He doesn't have
to perfect holiness like we do. Everything about him is inherently clean, pure, and upright.
What a contrast Jehovah's holiness is to the world around us. Today virtually everything about
human society alienated from God is polluted in some way, either by inherited imperfection or
by outright wickedness. But Jehovah is completely removed from sinfulness. He'll never be polluted
by badness. He'll never turn corrupt, immoral, or abusive. Because he's absolutely holy,
he's completely reliable. This means that Jehovah is the ideal Father. How encouraging and reassuring.
Jehovah's holiness is beautiful. Think about the physical world. How do you feel about beautiful things?
Are you drawn to them or repelled by them? For example, look at these landscapes. How do they make
you feel? Would you like to spend time here? Can you see yourself walking here, filling your
lungs with clean, fresh air? Or how about drinking from a river of pure crystal clear water?
How we yearn to live in such conditions and we will. But have you ever wondered what it is about
these images that's so appealing? Simply put, everything is pure and clean. On the other hand,
if these same locations were filled with garbage, graffiti, and smog, would you still want to be
there? Likely not. Pollution and filth are not attractive. What's the point? We're naturally drawn
to beauty. Beauty is associated with things that are clean, pure, and bright. That's how Jehovah wants
us to view His holiness. Meditating on this aspect of God's personality draws us closer to Him.
And though He hates all sin, His word confirms that He doesn't hate us. All of this stirs
within us a desire to perfect holiness. Let's now open to 2 Corinthians, chapter 7 and verse 1.
Our theme Scripture. Though Paul wrote this to one congregation, Jehovah preserved it for us.
It says,
Therefore, since we have these promises beloved ones, let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement
of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. The concluding part of the verse
serves as the basis for our theme. What does it mean to perfect something?
According to one dictionary, to perfect means to bring to a state of supreme excellence,
to rid of faults, to improve or refine. As an example, perhaps you enjoy a hobby like drawing
taking photographs or playing an instrument. If an expert in that field told you that you should
perfect your talent, what would he mean? First, he's confirming that you have some
experience already. Second, he's telling you, you have what it takes to be even better in the future.
I can see your potential. Of course, perfecting a hobby takes time.
The same is true of our holiness. The book, word pictures in the New Testament,
notes that the word perfecting at 2 Corinthians, chapter 7 and verse 1, means not a sudden
attainment of complete holiness, but a continuous process. So Jehovah, the expert in holiness,
and our best friend is appealing to us. In effect, he's saying, I see your potential.
You have what it takes to make progress in holiness. Keep working to perfect it.
Does such an appeal touch your heart? We could ask ourselves, is there an area in my life where I
can refine my holiness? For example, consider the matter of physical cleanness.
Chapter 8 of the book, How to Remain in God's Love, discusses the need to glorify Jehovah by
keeping our body and clothing, our home and surroundings, and our place of worship clean.
Being physically clean benefits us and those around us. More important, it honors our Holy Father.
But our personal cleaning program must go below the surface. In our theme text,
Jehovah urges us to cleanse ourselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit.
This involves every aspect of our lives. For example, something we read in the Bible or that
we hear at a meeting may warn us that our thoughts need further refinement. Perhaps we detect
a tendency toward materialism, or we realize that our precious time is being consumed by social
media, surfing the internet, or playing video games. In Ephesians 4, 23 and 24, we're urged to
continue to be made new in our dominant mental attitude and to put on the new personality.
So our challenge might be a deeply ingrained, negative personality trait.
A sister named Kristina admitted, I often find myself looking envyously at others.
I compare what they have with what I don't have. Well, these are just a few examples,
and these may not be our weaknesses, but the lesson is clear, all of us need to keep examining
ourselves. And brothers and sisters, when we identify a personal weakness, what should we do?
For illustration purposes, let's use the example of Kristina and her battle with envy.
A three-step program to change our dominant mental attitude was published on page 11 of the June
2019 study edition of The Watchtower. What's the first thing Kristina should do?
Step 1. She needs to talk to Jehovah, admitting that she recognizes the need to change.
If she prays regularly for Jehovah to put within her a new spirit, our Holy God will help her.
Step 2. She needs to meditate, so as to examine herself in the mirror of God's Word.
For example, she might think deeply about the fact that love is not jealous and does not look
for its own interests. This would help Kristina to hate envy. Step 3. She needs to assess her
relationships and choose good association. Could it be that negative gossip either in person or
online is shaping her thinking? If so, she'd be wise to choose better association.
Yes, Jehovah's blessing upon Kristina's personal efforts will enable her to perfect holiness.
These three steps can help us do the same.
Let's now review our key points. First, wickedness is going from bad to worse,
so we need to intensify our efforts to be holy. Second, since Jehovah is the source of holiness,
everything about Him is clean, pure, and upright. This beautiful quality draws us to Him and moves
us to be holy. Third, and most important, Jehovah appeals to us to cleanse ourselves of every
defilement of flesh and spirit. So may we accept Jehovah's help and work to perfect holiness
in God's fear. Even as we strive to perfect holiness, we don't look down on people who have
been molded by the world around us. In the following experience from Italy, notice how a group
of young men who had a rough start in life were drawn to the truths and what a courageous sister did
to reach their hearts. Our parents loved us, but they did it the wrong way. They would often turn
violent, so we learned that way of life. I remember that since I was young, I was afraid of coming
home one day and not finding my parents together, because as far as I remember, they have always argued
with each other. So we grew up with those values and those ways of thinking that led us to become a group
that was known and feared in the area because of our violent, immoral lifestyle devoted to drugs.
We had no rules. We were people that you should stay away from. It was one of those regular mornings
when we were home and on, and it used to become our hideout, the place we would meet.
We had skip school and our parents didn't know. I was with the Rico Enra family. When two sisters,
two of Jehovah's Witnesses rang the doorbell. So we had them come in so we could make fun of them
and as a matter of fact that's what we did. I remember that Maria and the sister that was with her
were two very sincere and genuine people. They showed courage as they brought us the truth.
I was surprised that they were so kind despite my tone of voice was mocking and I really appreciated
their kindness. She didn't let anything stop her, not even the way we looked.
I was really touched by the conversation with Maria but I thought I would never see her again.
Who would ever come back to people like us? Maria didn't give up. She came back with an older
pineal brother who wasn't scared of us and with courage started to preach.
I really started to change my life and make progress. Immediately I started to speak about what I was
learning with all my friends. What surprised me was my mother's reaction. She wasn't happy at all.
She reacted really violently. They thought that I was I was going mad that it was being brainwashed.
I remember they would do everything to remind me of the strong friendship that was between us
so they would put pressure on me emotionally. I had to make a choice although I did love them
and was close to them. I made the drastic decision to tell them that from then on I would no longer
be staying in their company. This situation made me really intrigued. In fact I ended up studying
with Francesco. His determination really made me think. It was obvious that the things he was
telling us were actually real. It was the truth and also the strength it took to go forward with this.
His determination to leave his friends was surely what made all of us seriously interested in
the message he was preaching. I would blame it on the truth because he was taking my friend away
from me, a friend with whom I used to do the things I liked. However inside I knew even though
I told him he had gone mad I knew inside that there must have been something powerful
because he was so convinced and we could all sense his conviction. So I realized that there was
really something there. To my surprise one after the other all of my friends started studying the
Bible. As I studied I realized that it was the truth. It used to be hatred that always motivated
my choices. Now I act according to love and this makes me feel good. I can now say that
thanks to Maria and Francesco Jehovah tried to draw me to him. I believe it's been a miracle
from Jehovah. The truth helped me cultivate the qualities of peace and joy, the personality that
has made it possible for me to have the family I never had. The greatest satisfaction I have in
life is to have a relationship with Jehovah. When I see someone like me used to be I feel motivated
to speak to them. The patients that Maria showed motivates me to be patient.
Despite our reputation Maria did not give up. She showed us that in Jehovah's eyes no one is beyond
recovery. No one. Before they found the truth those young men were as they put it people you
should stay away from. Would you have hesitated to give a witness? Our sister Maria didn't.
And did you notice what our brother did when he embraced the truth? He went to his friends and
broke off his association. He knew he needed friends who shared his determination to serve God.
So do we. We see the wonderful results. All of them are now brothers. They cleansed themselves.
And what was the most meaningful transformation? Our brother said it. It used to be hatred that
motivated my choices. Now it's love. Whether we're new in the truth or have served Jehovah for
decades we can perfect holiness and move forward as spiritual people. We'll see that in our next
segment. Look for how our brothers applied good suggestions from the watchtower. The challenge of
serving in a foreign country can sometimes be that because you've made that move and you've
learned a foreign language you can feel like you've done enough. I was brought up by a witness
mother so I studied the Bible since I was small so I thought I had Bible knowledge to some extent.
My wife and I have enjoyed the traveling work for 18 years. As we get older trials that we never
experienced when we were young come up one after another. After I got married and had children
I had a hard time explaining the backgrounds of some Bible characters or biblical history.
When I studied the Bible with my children then I realized that I did not have enough Bible knowledge.
And another challenge can be that you're dealing with a foreign culture in the territory but you
also have many different cultures in the congregation. When I struggle to fulfill various
responsibilities in a balanced way things such as caring for aged parents and our own health
issues can be a source of stress and cause tension between my wife and me.
The study article moved forward as a spiritual person in February 2018 was a big help.
The expressions once we have identified areas for improvement we need to take positive steps
and that it is a life and death matter really touched my heart.
I realized that I needed to scrutinize my life seriously and make improvements for my own future
and that of my family. The article had a quote from Brother Barr that said many fail because they're
not diligent enough to grow mighty. This made me think am I mighty enough to overcome any
challenges that might come up difficulties with brothers and sisters in a way that pleases Jehovah.
To move ahead is a spiritual person I realized I needed to get Jehovah's thinking on matters
and really look at Bible principles and that means letting go of my pride when it comes back,
letting go of it again and really making Jehovah's thoughts my own thoughts.
I have a bad tendency to try to do everything by myself and to not delegate things to others.
I ask myself, what decision will please Jehovah? Make sure of the more important things.
I felt the need to train younger brothers in the congregation so that I could
delegate responsibilities to them. The article encouraged us to look to Bible principles and
two that really helped me were Proverbs chapter 15, verse 28 and Philippians chapter 2, verse 4
because it helped me to think about what is in the person's best interest before I responded to
them. I took time when reading Bible accounts to meditate on how I would feel if I were one of those
Bible characters. I can now explain things better at my children's study. I'm very happy to see
my children truly enjoying Christian activities. My son started doing play meetings for fun.
My daughter loves the ministry. She talks to people willingly, not because we as parents
are telling her to do so. Compared to how it was when I was a child, things are totally different now
and that really makes me happy. By applying this principle I can lighten my load and reduce my stress
level. In turn, that helps me to maintain joy, to strengthen our relationship as a couple
and I feel I've become more approachable to those in the congregation.
Having the mind of Christ has helped me in my assignment because it's helped me to form
really close friendships with the brothers and sisters in my congregation and that's brought me
a lot of joy in my service. And also when I don't know what to do, which often happens,
I have Jehovah's principles to guide me and that makes me feel safe and secure.
Family Heads. Did you notice how Yusk took to heart the suggestion to analyze his life
and look for ways to improve? He realized that while he had some Bible knowledge,
he needed to deepen it through study and meditation. That made him a more effective teacher for his
children. Jane was doing fine work as a pioneer in a foreign land. Yet ironically she had difficulty
with brothers and sisters from different cultures. Do we? What stood in her way? She said,
I had to let go of my pride. Once she did, Jehovah's thoughts became her thoughts.
Perhaps like Yutaka Kimura, you're dealing with changing life circumstances. What do we learn from
his example? He delegated responsibilities and reordered his priorities. That took humility.
The result? Reduced stress and increased joy. Often honest self-examination reveals the
root cause of something we need to adjust. We'll see that in the following dramatization.
I embarrassed my wife tonight. I knew when it happened. And I didn't want to talk about it.
But I knew in my heart that Yumi was right. I had become unkind. There were lots of examples.
I complained about the way one brother conducts meetings for field service.
I was jealous of a ministerial servant who received new privileges. And I was pretty blunt,
but how frustrated I get with Yumi's parents. I thought I'd gotten rid of my old personality,
but it still lurked inside of me. Some of my friends were okay with and even encouraged these
bad qualities. The change was so gradual, I didn't even realize how far I'd fallen.
What do you think I need to do to change? How about we search for good for building up from
the online library? Sounds good. Let's take a look. We considered Ephesians chapter 4, verse 29,
which says, let a rotten word not come out of your mouth. But only what is good for building up
to impart what is beneficial to the ears. I was struck by this powerful word picture.
Rotten words are as disgusting as rotten food. I didn't want the things coming out of my mouth
to discuss my life or anyone else. But to change, I needed a plan. Now, I really tried to think
before I speak, and I have a goal to give someone real accommodation at every meeting. I have a
goal from my conversations too. I want to keep them wholesome, true, and kind. It's amazing how
speaking kindly to others can make you feel so good inside. I shouldn't be surprised
because it's just another way of showing God's love. I don't think I'll ever forget that image of
the rotten fruit, but isn't that the point? No one wants their words and conversations to be like
that. We want to perfect holiness with clean conversations. How do we keep our speech
up building and kind? Like our brother, we need to look within ourselves. What's causing us to
say hurtful things? He discovered the old personality still lurking inside, and he realized some
of his friends were actually encouraging his critical attitude. But he did more than analyze
himself. He made a plan and set goals. As his thinking changed, so did his speech. That drew
people to him, and he felt good inside. As that brother realized, sometimes, even without noticing it,
we could move backward spiritually. We need to move forward, perfecting holiness.
We'll next hear from a brother who took more than a step or two backward. Notice what helped him
regain his relationship with Jehovah. My first contact with witnesses was in my 20s. As my
knowledge increased, I made drastic changes. I quit smoking, stopped swearing and using drugs.
I also changed my violent behavior. I completely gave up martial arts, and then I was baptized
as one of Jehovah's Witnesses. It was an amazing day that I would never forget.
Shortly after my baptism, I became quite involved in my work at the theater. The environment
was very immoral, you know. Even after several loving warnings from the brothers in the congregation,
advising me to look for another job, I choose not to follow their advice. I'd worked there for a long
time, so I thought I can handle it, but that was wrong. My conscience became dull, and I committed
a serious sin against Jehovah. When I left the truth, several office came my way. I became a manager
at a nightclub that was open until 6 in the morning. He was a lot of parties, and it was a lot of
drugs. I also received martial arts. I came in contact with serious criminals, and gradually became
friends with the most influential person in the criminal underworld in Oslo. Eventually, I was
in prison for my violent behavior. Christian movement visited the prison where I was,
and all of the inmates were invited to an event where they would be cake served. That sounded
very interesting. I was tempted by a cake. They also played music, but after a while, I started
speaking in tongues, and I felt very uncomfortable. I didn't want to be involved in that, but I couldn't
get up. Even though I was big and strong back then, I physically couldn't stand up from my chair.
I've experienced a lot in my life, but at that moment, I was genuinely scared. So I cried out to
Jehovah immediately. I was released, and I was able to get up and leave. This big man was now
in a fetal position crying, and then I called my wife and asked her to bring me a Bible and some
literature. I had to start studying again and draw close to Jehovah. The greatest challenge was
prayer to start communicating with Jehovah again after being so far away from him,
doing all these bad things. You know, it was a long way to go. One scripture I especially
remember is Isaiah 118, where he says, come now, let us set matter straight between us,
that touch me deeply. He also says that if your sins are red like scarlet,
Jehovah will make them white as snow. It felt like he separated the darkness and stretched out
his hand and pulled me out back into the light again. Six months after I was reinstated, my wife
decided to dedicate her life to Jehovah and was baptized. She has been a huge support during my
return. I was very nervous at first, but when I entered the kingdom hall, that feeling just
disappeared. God's spirit is here. The way the brothers and sisters acted towards each other
was such a contrast to my former lifestyle. We feel deeply blessed by Jehovah. Of course,
you make mistakes once in a while, but now I feel confident that Jehovah is merciful.
At his lowest point, Peter said he felt so far away from Jehovah.
If you can relate to his situation in some way, be assured that you too can set matter straight.
You can experience what Peter did. Jehovah helping him out of the darkness into the light again.
Remember, Jehovah is saying to you and to all of us, I see your potential. You have what it takes.
Today, some of the greatest challenges are faced by our young people. This month's music video
was made especially for them. It's entitled, Fight the Find Fight of the Faith.
Jehovah see it. What a beautiful song and a beautiful reminder.
Jehovah does help us to win our fight of the faith. In what ways? As we saw in the video,
he helps us through our family and fellow worshipers through the ministry and through his word
the Bible. Preserving God's word and his personal name has been a fierce fight over many centuries,
a fight that's being won. This is the subject of the Bible Museum at World Headquarters in Warwick,
New York. Let's take a brief tour. The Bible is a modern day treasure. It reveals the satisfying
truth about God, life, and our hope for the future. What's more, it contains another
priceless treasure. God's personal name, Jehovah. How Jehovah preserved his name in the holy
scriptures against all attempts to remove it is a fascinating story. And it's told here,
in the Bible Museum at World Headquarters in Warwick. Let's take the tour.
At the museum's entry, the divine name is shown in various languages a total of 7,216 times.
That's how many times it appears in the new world translation of the holy scriptures.
Jehovah always made his name known, even to the very first humans. When Cain was born,
Eve declared, I have produced a male child with the help of Jehovah.
After that time, people knew and used God's name. The oldest example of the divine name in Hebrew
letters is on the Moabite Stone from the 9th century BCE. Moabite King Misha boasted against Israel.
I took from it the vessels of Jehovah and offered them before Kymash.
There's also evidence that in ancient times, God's name was used in everyday life.
This silver scroll from the 7th century BCE is the earliest known inscription of a Bible text
containing God's name. It reads,
Majorhovah bless you and keep you. Majorhovah make his face shine on you.
Most important, God's name was in ancient copies of the Bible text.
The Fouad Papyrus from the 1st century BCE is a fragment of the Greek Septuagint,
the first known translation of the Hebrew scriptures into Greek. Here's Deuteronomy chapter 32,
verse 3, for I will declare the name of Jehovah. Although the text is in Greek,
the divine name is written in Hebrew. Greek speaking Jews in Jesus' day used the Septuagint.
So when Jesus read and taught from the scriptures, people heard him use the divine name.
Sadly, though, by the 3rd century CE, God's name was removed from the Septuagint and replaced
with the title Lord. As an example, the Vatican codex from the 4th century CE includes the text
of the Greek Septuagint, but omits God's name. Deuteronomy chapter 32, verse 3, here reads,
for I will declare the name of the Lord. But Jehovah wouldn't allow his name to be lost.
It was never removed from Hebrew copies of the Bible. The Aleppo codex was copied by Jewish
scribes around the year 930 CE. The same verse, Deuteronomy chapter 32, verse 3 says in Hebrew,
for I will declare the name of Jehovah. Still, for centuries, most people didn't have a Bible
in their own language, nor one that contained God's name. The Latin Vulgate translated around
405 CE omitted the divine name. It became the official translation of the Catholic Church for
over 1,000 years. But a new technology triggered events that would soon make the Bible
widely available and infresh translations that return God's name to its rightful place.
About 1453, Johannes Gutenberg produced an important edition of the Latin Vulgate. It was the first
Bible printed using movable type. This is an original page from a Gutenberg Bible. While only
some 180 Bibles were made, his invention sparked the printing revolution.
Just 20 years later, Anton Kohlberger was printing up to 1,000 Bibles per run, making it the first
mass-produced Bible. On display is an original copy of the second edition of Kohlberger's Latin
Bible from 1477. Then, in the early 1500s, Bible scholars took a renewed interest in the original
Bible languages. For the very first time, the original language Hebrew and Greek scriptures were
printed together. This is the Completency in Polyglot, printed between 1514 and 1517.
A polyglot is a book with text in several languages arranged in columns. In the Completency
in Polyglot, the Bible text appears in Latin, Hebrew, Aramaic, and Greek. Comparing the Hebrew
text with the Latin, scholars could see where God's name had been replaced in the Latin Vulgate
with Lord. But would seeing the divine name in the original Hebrew text lead Bible translators
to restore God's name in their translations? Indeed, some did. In 1551, Sebastian Castelio
published his fresh Latin translation of the Bible. He appears to be the first to use God's name
consistently in a Latin translation of the Hebrew scriptures. Translations into other languages
were also using God's name. In 1530, William Tyndale published his English translation of Genesis
through Deuteronomy. It was the first time that the vine name appeared in any English Bible.
The popular Reina Valera Spanish Bible was published in 1602. It contains the divine name throughout
the Hebrew scriptures. This is a rare original first edition of the English King James version
of the Bible, published in 1611. It uses the name Jehovah in just four passages. Still,
the King James version became the most widely printed book in the world. Some 200 years later,
Benjamin Boothworth, a minister and Hebrew scholar, set out to revise the King James version.
His 1817 translation was the first English Bible to use the divine name throughout the Hebrew
scriptures. Meanwhile, church missionaries were taking the Bible to new lands, but without the
divine name, people couldn't distinguish the God of the Bible from their own false gods.
So Bible translations and many languages of Asia, Africa, the Pacific Islands, and the Americas
included God's name. The Chinese delegates version from 1854 is an example of a missionary
Bible that uses God's name throughout the Hebrew scriptures. Still, there was one more place where
God's name was not yet restored, the Christian Greek scriptures. This is the Nuremberg Polyglot,
published by Elias Hutter in 1599. It contains the Christian Greek scriptures in 12 languages,
including Hebrew. Here, John's Gospel quotes Psalm 118 verse 26,
Blessed is the one who comes in Jehovah's name. In his Hebrew translation of the Gospel,
Hunter preserved the divine name in the quotation from Psalms. He did this in many other places in
the Greek scriptures. Translators had a precedent to use God's name in the Christian Greek
scriptures where the name appeared in verses quoted from the Hebrew scriptures. This is the 1864
6th edition New Testament translation by Herman Heinfetter. It's likely the first published
English Bible to use God's name in more than 100 places in the Christian Greek scriptures.
The New World translation of the Holy Scriptures was first published between 1950 and 1960.
Its translators benefited from the scholarly work of those before them who had chosen
to preserve God's name in their Bible translations. Today, the New World translation is available
in whole or in part in over 170 languages. God's name, Jehovah, belongs in the Holy Scriptures
he inspired. This gallery holds just a small part of the overwhelming evidence to this fact.
The Bible is a precious gift from God, teaching us about His works, His qualities,
and His loving purpose for humankind. He invites each of us to read it, to draw close to Him,
and to know Him by His most holy name, Jehovah.
Our program has focused on perfecting holiness in God's fear. Perfecting holiness may sound
out of reach, but remember, it's a continuous process. We saw this with those young men in Italy
who left behind their violent and immoral ways. And with Jane, Yusuke, and Yutaka, we saw
experienced Christians who found ways to grow as spiritual people. We learned how to make our
speech more upbuilding by examining our motives and associations. Peter Heinrich's experience
demonstrates that it's possible to return to Jehovah with his help. Finally, our music video
reminds us that despite the unique pressures our young people face, they're winning the fight.
We close with a visit to our brothers and sisters in Puerto Rico.
Secluded beaches, lush valleys, mountains, this beautiful island is home to more than three
million inhabitants and nearly 24,000 Jehovah's Witnesses. But it's location in the
Caribbean puts Puerto Rico in the path of tropical storms and hurricanes. One of the most powerful
ever, Hurricane Maria, struck two years ago. Lives were lost, and homes were destroyed.
The entire island lost electricity for months. To help with relief efforts,
thousands of brothers and sisters from Puerto Rico and from across the United States
branch territory volunteered. They repaired and rebuilt 106 kingdom halls,
two assembly halls, and more than 800 homes of our brothers.
The Baraona congregation, located in the middle of the island, was enjoying their circuit
overseer visit when the hurricane hit. The body of elders and the circuit overseer
immediately organized and reached out to everyone in the congregation.
Despite the devastation, the Sunday meeting took place as scheduled. In fact,
despite dealing with challenging conditions for many months, the congregation didn't cancel a
single meeting. Within a few days of Hurricane Maria, the organized preaching work resumed,
and our brothers were back in the field. The response has been encouraging.
50 Bible studies are now being conducted. The 117 publishers in the Baraona congregation
send you their warm Christian love and greetings. From the World Headquarters of Jehovah's Witnesses,
this is J.W. Broadcasting.